hi this is the first lecture in MIT s
course 1806 linear algebra and I'm
Gilbert Strang the text for the course
is this book introduction to linear
algebra and the course web page which
has got a lot of exercises from the past
MATLAB codes the syllabus for the course
is webbed on mit.edu slash 18 point oh
six and this is the first lecture
lecture one so and later we'll say where
which will give the web address for
viewing these videotapes okay so what's
in the first lecture this is my plan the
fundamental problem of linear algebra
which is to solve a system of linear
equations so let's start with the case
when we have some number of equations
say n equations and n unknowns so an
equal number of equations and unknowns
that's the normal nice case and what I
want to do is with examples of course to
describe first what I call the role
picture that's the picture of one
equation at a time it's the picture
you've seen before in two by two
equations where lines meet so in a
minute you'll see lines meeting the
second picture well I put a star beside
that because that's such an important
one and maybe new to you is the picture
a column at a time and those are the
rows and columns of a matrix so the
third the algebra way to look at the
problem is the matrix form in using a
matrix that I'll call a
okay so can I do an example the whole
semester we'll be examples and then see
what's going on with it with the example
so take an example two equations two
unknowns so let me take 2x minus y
equals zero let's say and minus X plus
say two y equals three
okay look I can even say right away
what's the matrix that that is what's
the coefficient matrix the matrix that
involves these numbers a matrix is just
a rectangular array of numbers here the
here it's two rows and two columns so
two and minus one in the first row minus
1 and 2 in the second row that's the
matrix and the right-hand the unknown
well we've got two unknowns so we've got
a vector X with two components x and y
and we've got two right-hand sides that
go into a vector 0 3
I couldn't resist writing the matrix
form right or even before the before the
pictures so I always will think of this
as the matrix a the matrix of
coefficients then there's a vector of
unknowns here we've only got two
unknowns later we'll have any number of
unknowns and that vector of unknowns
well I'll often I'll make that X extra
lot extra bold and the right-hand side
is also a vector that I'll always call B
so linear equations are ax equal B and
the idea now is to solve this particular
example and then step back to see the
bigger picture ok what's the picture for
this example the row picture okay so
here comes the rope
so that means I take one row at a time
and I'm drawing here the XY plane and
I'm gonna put plot all the points that
satisfy that first equation so I'm
looking at all the points that satisfy
2x minus y equals zero I'm often it's
often good to start with which point on
the horizontal line on this horizontal
line y is zero the x axis has y is zero
and that in this case actually then x is
zero so the point the origin the point
with coordinates 0 0 is on the line it
solves that equation okay tell me and
well I guess I have to tell you another
point that solves this same equation let
me suppose X is 1 so I'll take X to be 1
then Y should be 2 right so there's the
point 1 2 that also solves this equation
then I could put in more points by that
but let me put in all the points at once
because they all lie on a straight line
this is a linear equation and that word
linear we've got the letters for line in
it that's the equation that's this is
the line that of the of solutions to 2x
minus y equals 0 my first row first
equation so typically maybe X equal 1/2
y equal 1 will work and it's sure enough
it does ok that's the first one now the
second one is not going to go through
the origin
it's always the important do we go
through the origin or not in this case
yes because there's a 0 over there in
this case we don't go through the origin
because if x and y are 0 we don't get 3
so let me again say suppose Y is
zero what X do we actually get if Y is
zero then I get X is minus three so if Y
is zero I go along minus three so
there's one point on this second line
now let me say well suppose X is minus
one just to take another X if X is minus
one then this is a 1 and I think Y
should be a 1 because if X is minus 1
then I think why should be a 1 and we'll
get that point is that right if X is
minus 1 that's a 1 if Y is a 1 that's a
2 and the 1 and the 2 make 3 and that
points on the equation ok now I should
just draw the line right connecting
those two points that depth will give me
the whole line and if I've done this
reasonably well I think it's going to
happen to go through
well not happen it was arranged to go
through that point so I think that the
second line is this one and this is the
all-important point that lies on both
lines shall we just checked at that
point which which is the point X equal 1
and Y was two right that's the point
there and that I believe solves both
equations let's just check this if X is
1 I have a minus 1 plus 4 equals 3 okay
apologies for drawing this picture that
you've seen before but this seeing the
row picture first of all for n equal to
2 equations in two unknowns it's the
right place to start
ok so we've got the solution the point
that lies on both lines now can I come
to the column picture pay attention this
is the P point so the column picture I'm
now going to look at the columns of the
matrix I'm going to look at this part
and this part I'm gonna say that that
the X part is really so so is really x
times you see I'm putting the two I'm
kind of getting the two equations at
once that part and then I have a y and
and in the first equation it's
multiplying a minus 1 and in second
equation a 2 and on the right hand side
0 and 3 you see the columns of the
matrix the columns of a are here and the
right-hand side B is there and now what
is the equation asking for it's asking
us to find some how to combine that
vector and this one in the right amounts
to get that one it's asking us to find
the right linear combination this is
called a linear combination and it's the
most fundamental operation in the whole
course it's a linear combination of the
columns that's what we're seeing on the
left side again I don't want to write
down a big definition you can see what
it is
there's column one there's column two I
multiply by some numbers and I add
that's a combination a linear
combination and I want to make those
numbers the right numbers to produce 0 3
ok now I want to draw a picture that
represents what this this is algebra
what's the geometry what's the picture
that goes with it ok so again these
vectors have two components so I better
draw a picture like that so can I put
down these columns I'll draw these
columns as they are and then I'll do do
a combination of them so the first
column is over 2 and down 1 right so
there's the first column
the first column column one it's the
vector 2 minus 1 the second column is C
I go over minus 1 is the first component
and up to its here
there's column 2 so this again you see
what its components are its components
are minus 1/2 good
that's this guy now what is what now I
have to take a combination what
combination shall I take
why not the right combination what the
hell okay so what the combination I'm
going to take is the right one to
produce 0 3 and that and then we'll see
it happen in the picture so the right
combination is to take X is one of those
and two of these it's because we already
know that that's the right x and y so
why not take the correct combination
here and see it happen ok so how do I
picture this this linear combination so
I start with this vector that's already
here so that's one of column 1 that's 1
times column 1 right there and now I
want to add on so I'm going to hook the
next vector on to the front of the arrow
we'll start the next vector and it'll go
this way so let's see if can I do it
right if I add it on one of these
vectors it would go left one and up two
so it would go left 1 and up 2 so it
would probably get us to there maybe
I'll do dotted line for that okay that's
one of column to tuck down to the end
but I wanted to talk on two of column 2
so that the second one will go up but
left one and up two also it'll probably
end there and there's another one so so
what I've put in here is two of column
two
added on and where did I end up what are
the coordinates of this result what do I
get when I take one of this plus two of
that I do get that of course there it is
there it is X is zero Y is three that's
B that's the that's the answer we wanted
and how do I do it
you see I do it just like the first
component I have a 2 and a minus 2 that
produces a zero and in the second
component I have a minus 1 and a 4 they
combine to give the 3 but look at this
picture so that here's our key picture I
combine this column and this column to
get maybe I better to get this guy that
was the B that's the zero 3 okay so that
idea of linear combinations is crucial
and and also do we want to think about
this question sure why not what are all
the combinations if I took can I go back
to X's and Y's this is a this is a
question for really it's it's going to
come up over and over but why don't we
see it once now if I took all the X's
and all the Y's all the combinations
what would be all the results and
actually the result would be that I
could get any right-hand side at all the
combinations of this and this would fill
the whole plane you can tuck that away
we'll just explore it further but this
idea of what linear combination gives B
and what do all the linear combinations
give what are all the possible
achievable right-hand sides B that's
going to be basic ok can I move to three
equations in three on
because it's easy to picture the 2 by 2
case let me do a 3 by 3 example okay
I'll sort of start it the same way say
maybe 2x minus y and maybe I'll take no
no Z's is a zero and maybe a minus X and
a 2y and maybe a minus Z is a oh let me
make that a minus one and just for
variety let me take minus 3 Z minus 3
wise I should keep the Y's in that line
and for Z's is say 4 okay that's three
equations I'm in three dimensions X Y Z
and I don't have a solution yet so I
want to understand the equations and
then solve them ok so how do i how do
you understand them the row picture is
one way the column picture is another
very important way just let's remember
the matrix form here because that's easy
the matrix form
what's our matrix a our matrix a is this
right hand side the 2 and the minus 1
and the 0 from the first row the minus 1
and the 2 and the minus 1 from the
second row the 0 the minus 3 and the 4
from the third row so it's a three by
three matrix three equations three
unknowns and what's our right-hand side
of course it's the vector 0 minus 1/4
okay so that's the way we'll that's the
shorthand to write out the three
equations but it's the picture that I'm
looking for today okay so the row
picture
all right so I'm in three dimensions X Y
& Z and I want to take those equations
one at a time and s and make a picture
of all the points that satisfy let's
take equation number two if I make a
picture of all the points that satisfy
all the XYZ points that solve this
equation well first of all the origin is
not one of them X Y Z being zero zero
zero would not solve that equation so
what what are some points that do solve
the equation let's see maybe if X is one
y + Z could be zero that would work
right so there's one point I'm looking
at this second equation here just to
start with let's see also I guess if Z Z
could be 1x and Y could be zero so that
would just go straight up that axis and
probably I want a third point here let
me take X to be 0 let's say X to be 0 Z
to be 0 then Y would be minus 1/2 right
so there's a third point somewhere oh ok
let's see I want to put in all the
points that satisfy that equation do you
know what that bunch of points will be
it's a plane if we have a linear
equation then fortunately the graph of
the thing the plot of all the points
that solve it or a plane so I and three
these three points determine a plane but
your lecture is not Rembrandt and this
the art is going to be the weak point
here so I'm just going to draw a plane
right there's a plane somewhere that's
my plane they draw that
that plane is all the points it solves
this guy then what about this one
2x minus y plus zero Z so Z actually can
be anything again it's going to be
another plane each row in a 3x3 problem
gives us a plane in three dimensions so
this one is going to be some other plane
maybe it maybe I'll try to draw it like
this and those two planes meet in a line
so if I have two equations just the
first two equations in in three
dimensions those give me a line the line
where those two planes meet and now the
third guy is a third plane and it goes
some somewhere okay those three things
meet at a point now I don't know where
that point is frankly but linear algebra
will find it the main point is that
there is that the three planes because
they're you know they're not parallel
they don't they're not special there
they do meet in one point and that's a
solution but maybe you can see that this
row picture is getting a little hard to
see the road picture was a cinch when we
looked at to me two lines meeting when
we look at three planes meeting it's not
so clear and in four dimensions probably
a little less clear so can I quit on the
row picture I'll quit on the row picture
before I've successfully found the point
where the three planes meet all I really
want to see is that there that the row
picture consists of three planes and if
everything works right three planes meet
in one point and that's a solution now
you can tell I prefer the column picture
okay so let me take the column picture
that's x times so there were two x's in
the first equation minus 1 X's I'm just
take and no X's in the third it's just
the first column of that and how many
Y's are there there's minus 1 in the
first equation 2 in the second and maybe
minus three in the third just the second
column of my matrix and Z times no Z's -
onesies and four Z's and it's those
three columns right that I have to
combine to produce the right-hand side
which is 0-1 4 okay
so what have we got on this left-hand
side a linear combination it's a linear
combination now of three vectors and
they happen to be each one is a
3-dimensional vector so we want to we
want to know what combination of those
three vectors produces that one shall I
try to draw the column picture then so
since these vectors have three
components so it's some multiple let me
draw in the first column as before so I
X is 2 and Y is minus 1 maybe maybe
there's the first column Y the second
column has maybe a minus 1 and a 2 and
the Y's and minus 3 some somewhere there
possibly column 2 and the third column
has no no 0 minus 1/4 so how shall I
draw that so nothing in this is this was
that this was the first component the
second component was a minus 1 maybe up
here that's column 3 that's that's the
column 0 minus 1 and for this guy so
again what's my problem
my what this equation is asking me to do
is to combine these three vectors with
the right combination to produce this
one well you can see what the right
combination is because in this special
problem especially chosen by the
lecturer that right hand side that I'm
trying to get is actually one of these
columns so I know how to get that one so
what's the solution what combination
will work I just want one of these and
none of these so X should be 0 y should
be 0 and Z should be 1 to come that's
the combination none of that none of
that one of those is obviously the right
one so this column 3 is actually the
same as B in this particular problem I
made it work that way just so we would
get an answer 0 0 1 so somehow that's
the point that where those three planes
met and I couldn't see it before of
course I won't always be able to see it
from the column picture either it's the
next lecture actually which is about
elimination which is the systematic way
that everybody every every bit of
software to a production large scale
software would solve the equations so
the lecture that's coming up if I was to
add that to the syllabus will be about
how to find X Y Z in in all cases can I
just think again though about the big
picture the big buy the big picture I
mean let's keep this same matrix on the
left but imagine that we have a
different right-hand side oh let me take
a different right-hand side so I'll
change
right hand side to something that
actually is also pretty special let me
change it to suppose I if I add those
first two columns that would give me a 1
and a 1 and a minus 3 there's a very
special right hand side I just cooked it
up by adding this one to this one now
what's the solution with this new right
hand side the solution with this new
right hand side is clear it took now I
took one of these one of these and none
of those so so actually it just changed
around on this when I took this new
right hand side okay so the in there in
the role picture I have three different
planes three three three new planes
meeting now at this point in the column
picture I have the same three columns
but now I'm combining them to produce
this guy and it turned out that column
one plus column two which would be
somewhere there there is the right
column one of this and one of this would
give me the the new B okay so that's
like we squeezed in an extra example but
now think about all B's all right hand
sides could I get can I solve these
equations for every right hand side can
I say that ask that question so that's
the algebra question can I solve ax
equal B for every B let me write that
down
can I solve ax equal B for every right
hand side B I mean is there a solution
and then if there is elimination will
give me a way to find it I'm just I
really wanted to ask is there a solution
for every right-hand side so now can I
put that in different words in this
linear combination
words so in linear combination words do
the linear combinations of the columns
fill three-dimensional space every B
means all the B's in three-dimensional
space so do you see that I'm just asking
the same question in in different words
solving a ax
oh that's very important a times X when
I multiply a matrix by a vector I get a
combination of the columns let me I'll
write that down in a moment
so that you see but in my column picture
that's really what I'm doing I'm taking
linear combinations of these three
columns and I'm trying to find B and
actually the answer for this matrix will
be yes for this matrix for this for this
matrix a for these columns the answer is
yes this matrix is this this this matrix
that that I chose for an example is a
good matrix a non singular matrix an
invertible matrix so those will be the
matrices that we like best there could
be other and we will see other matrices
where the answer becomes no oh actually
you can see when it would become no when
could what what could go wrong how could
it go wrong that out of these out of
three columns and all their combinations
when would I not be able to produce some
be off here when when could it go wrong
do you see that the combinations
supposed let me say when it goes wrong
if these three columns all lie in the
same plane then their combinations will
lie in that same plane so then we're in
trouble if the three columns of my
matrix if those three vectors happen to
lie in the same plane
for example if column 3 is just the sum
of column 1 and column 2 I would be in
trouble that would be a matrix a where
the answer would be no because the
combinations if column 3 is in the same
plane as column 1 and 2 I don't get
anything new from that all the
combinations are in the plane and the
only right-hand sides B that I could get
would be the ones in that plane so I
could solve it for some right-hand sides
when B is in the in the plane but most
right-hand sides would be out of the
plane and unreachable so that would be a
singular case the matrix would be not
invertible there would not be a solution
for every B the answer would become no
for that okay I don't know so we take
just a little shot at thinking about
nine dimensions imagine that we have
vectors with nine components well it's
gonna be hard to visualize those I don't
pretend to do it but somehow pretend you
do pretend we have if if this was nine
equations in nine unknowns then we would
have nine columns and each one would be
a vector in nine dimensional space and
we would be looking at their linear
combinations so we'd be having the
linear combination
of nine vectors in nine dimensional
space and we would be trying to find the
combination that hit the correct right
hand side B and we might also ask the
question can we always do it
can we get every right hand side B and
certainly it will depend on those nine
columns some sometimes the answer will
be yes if I picked a random matrix it
would be yes actually if I use MATLAB
and just use the random command picked
out a 9 by 9 matrix I guarantee it would
be good it would be non-singular it
would be invertible all beautiful but if
I choose those columns so that they're
not independent so that they're there so
that the the ninth column is the same as
the 8th column then it contributes
nothing new and there would be
right-hand sides B that I couldn't get
can you sort of think about nine vectors
in nine dimensional space and take their
combinations that's really the central
thought that that you get kind of used
to in linear algebra even so you can't
really visualize it you sort of think
you can after a while those nine columns
and all their combinations may very well
fill out the whole nine dimensional
space but if the ninth column happened
to be the same as the eighth column and
gave nothing new then probably what it
would fill out would be I hesitate even
to say this it would be a a sort of
plain an eight dimensional plane inside
nine dimensional space and it's those
eight dimensional planes inside nine
dimensional space that we have to work
with eventually
for now let's stay with a nice case
where
the matrices work we can get every
right-hand side B and here we see how to
do it with columns okay there was one
step that I realize which I realized I
was saying in words that I now want to
write in letters because I'm coming back
to the matrix form of the equation so
let me write it here the matrix form of
my equation of my of my system is some
matrix a times some vector X equals some
right-hand side B okay so this is a
multiplication a times X matrix times
vector and I just want to say how do you
multiply a matrix by a vector okay so
I'm just going to create a a matrix let
me take 2 5 1 3 and let me take a vector
X to be say 1 and 2 how do I multiply a
matrix by a vector and we'll just think
a little bit about matrix notation and
how to do that multiplication so let me
say how I multiply a matrix by a vector
actually there are two ways to do it let
me tell you my favorite way it's a it's
its columns again it's a column at a
time for me that matrix mode this matrix
multiplication says I take one of that
column and two of that column and add so
this is in my the way I would think of
it is one of the first column and two of
the second column and and let's just see
what we get so in the first component
I'm getting a two and a 10 I'm getting a
12 there and the second component I'm
giving a 1 and a 6 I'm getting a 7 so
that that matrix times that vector is 12
7 now
you could do that another way you could
do it a row at a time you could do and
you would get this 12 and actually I
pretty much did it here this way
- I could take that row times my vector
this is this is all the time this is the
idea of a dot product this vector times
this vector 2 times 1 plus 5 times 2 is
the 12 this vector times this vector 1
times 1 plus 3 times 2 is the 7 so I can
do it by rows and in each row each row
times my X is what I'll later call a dot
product but I also like to see it by
columns I see this as a linear
combination of the columns so here's my
point a times X is a combination of the
columns of a that's that's how I hope
you will think of a times X when we need
it right now we've got with small ones
we can always do it in different ways
but later think of it that way ok so
that's the picture for a 2 by 2 system
and if the right-hand side B happened to
be 12 7 then of course the correct
solution would be 1 2 okay so let me
come back next time to a systematic way
using elimination to find the solution
if there is one to any a system of any
size and find out because the system
because eliminate if elimination fails
find out when there isn't a solution ok
thanks